# Mars 101

## Problem Statement:
**Mars** is the fourth [planet](planet "wikilink") from the
[Sun](Sun "wikilink") and the second-smallest planet in the [Solar
System](Solar_System "wikilink"), being larger than only
[Mercury](Mercury_(planet) "wikilink"). In the English language, Mars is
named for the [Roman god of war](Mars_(mythology) "wikilink"). Mars is a
[terrestrial planet](terrestrial_planet "wikilink") with a thin
[atmosphere](atmosphere "wikilink") (less than 1% that of Earth\'s), and
has a crust primarily composed of elements similar to Earth\'s crust, as
well as a core made of iron and nickel. Mars has surface features such
as [impact craters](impact_crater "wikilink"), valleys, dunes, and
[polar ice caps](polar_ice_caps "wikilink"). It has two small and
irregularly shaped moons: [Phobos](Phobos_(moon) "wikilink") and
[Deimos](Deimos_(moon) "wikilink").

Some of the most notable surface features on Mars include [Olympus
Mons](Olympus_Mons "wikilink"), the largest
[volcano](volcano "wikilink") and [highest known
mountain](List_of_tallest_mountains_in_the_Solar_System "wikilink") on
any planet in the Solar System, and [Valles
Marineris](Valles_Marineris "wikilink"), one of the largest canyons in
the Solar System. The [Borealis
basin](North_Polar_Basin_(Mars) "wikilink") in the Northern Hemisphere
covers approximately 40% of the planet and may be a large impact
feature.[^1] [Days and seasons on Mars](Timekeeping_on_Mars "wikilink")
are comparable to those of Earth, as the planets have a similar
[rotation period](rotation_period "wikilink") and tilt of the
[rotational axis](Rotation_around_a_fixed_axis "wikilink") relative to
the [ecliptic plane](Ecliptic "wikilink"). Liquid [water on the surface
of Mars](Water_on_Mars "wikilink") cannot exist due to low atmospheric
pressure, which is less than 1% of the atmospheric pressure on
Earth.[^2][^3] Both of Mars\'s polar ice caps appear to be made largely
of water.[^4][^5] In the distant past, Mars was likely wetter, and thus
possibly more suited for life. However, it is unknown whether [life has
ever existed on Mars](Life_on_Mars "wikilink").

[Mars has been explored](Exploration_of_Mars "wikilink") by several
uncrewed spacecraft, beginning with *[Mariner 4](Mariner_4 "wikilink")*
in 1965. NASA\'s *[Viking 1](Viking_program "wikilink")* lander
transmitted in 1976 the first images from the Martian surface. Two
countries have successfully deployed
[rovers](Rover_(space_exploration) "wikilink") on Mars, the United
States first doing so with *[Sojourner](Sojourner_(rover) "wikilink")*
in 1997 and China with *[Zhurong](Zhurong_(rover) "wikilink")* in
2021.[^6] There are also planned future missions to Mars, such as a
[Mars sample-return mission](Mars_sample-return_mission "wikilink") set
to happen in 2026, and the [*Rosalind Franklin* rover
mission](Rosalind_Franklin_(rover) "wikilink"), which was intended to
launch in 2018 but was delayed to 2024 at the earliest, with a more
likely launch date at 2028.

Mars can be viewed from Earth with the naked eye, as can its [reddish
coloring](Mars_surface_color "wikilink"). This appearance, due to the
[iron oxide](Iron(III)_oxide "wikilink") prevalent on its surface, has
led to Mars often being called the **Red Planet**.[^7][^8] It is among
the [brightest objects in Earth\'s
sky](List_of_brightest_natural_objects_in_the_sky "wikilink"), with an
[apparent magnitude](apparent_magnitude "wikilink") that reaches −2.94,
comparable to that of [Jupiter](Jupiter "wikilink") and surpassed only
by [Venus](Venus "wikilink"), the [Moon](Moon "wikilink") and the
Sun.[^9] Historically, Mars has been observed since ancient times, and
over the millennia, has been featured in culture and the arts in ways
that have reflected humanity\'s growing knowledge of it.

Historical observations
-----------------------

The history of observations of Mars is marked by the oppositions of Mars
when the planet is closest to Earth and hence is most easily visible,
which occur every couple of years. Even more notable are the [perihelic
oppositions](perihelic_opposition "wikilink") of Mars, which are
distinguished because Mars is close to perihelion, making it even closer
to Earth.[^10]

### Ancient and medieval observations

The ancient [Sumerians](Sumer "wikilink") named Mars
[Nergal](Nergal "wikilink"), the god of war and plague. During Sumerian
times, Nergal was a minor deity of little significance, but, during
later times, his main cult center was the city of
[Nineveh](Nineveh "wikilink").[^11] In Mesopotamian texts, Mars is
referred to as the \"star of judgement of the fate of the dead.\"[^12]
The existence of Mars as a wandering object in the night sky was also
recorded by the ancient [Egyptian
astronomers](Egyptian_astronomy "wikilink") and, by 1534 BCE, they were
familiar with the [retrograde
motion](Apparent_retrograde_motion "wikilink") of the planet.[^13] By
the period of the [Neo-Babylonian
Empire](Neo-Babylonian_Empire "wikilink"), the [Babylonian
astronomers](Babylonian_astronomy "wikilink") were making regular
records of the positions of the planets and systematic observations of
their behavior. For Mars, they knew that the planet made 37 [synodic
periods](Orbital_period "wikilink"), or 42 circuits of the zodiac, every
79 years. They invented arithmetic methods for making minor corrections
to the predicted positions of the planets.[^14][^15] In [Ancient
Greece](Ancient_Greece "wikilink"), the planet was known as .[^16]
Commonly, the Greek name for the planet now referred to as Mars, was
Ares. It was the Romans who named the planet Mars, for their god of war,
often represented by the sword and shield of the planet\'s
namesake.[^17]

In the fourth century BCE, [Aristotle](Aristotle "wikilink") noted that
Mars disappeared behind the Moon during an
[occultation](occultation "wikilink"), indicating that the planet was
farther away.[^18] [Ptolemy](Ptolemy "wikilink"), a Greek living in
[Alexandria](Alexandria "wikilink"),[^19] attempted to address the
problem of the orbital motion of Mars. Ptolemy\'s model and his
collective work on astronomy was presented in the multi-volume
collection later called the *[Almagest](Almagest "wikilink")* (from the
Arabic for \"greatest\"), which became the authoritative treatise on
[Western astronomy](Medieval_astronomy "wikilink") for the next fourteen
centuries.[^20] Literature from ancient China confirms that Mars was
known by [Chinese astronomers](Chinese_astronomy "wikilink") by no later
than the fourth century BCE.[^21] In the [East
Asian](East_Asian "wikilink") cultures, Mars is traditionally referred
to as the \"fire star\" (Chinese: ), based on the [*Wuxing*
system](Wuxing_(Chinese_philosophy) "wikilink").[^22][^23][^24]

During the seventeenth century A.D., [Tycho
Brahe](Tycho_Brahe "wikilink") measured the [diurnal
parallax](diurnal_parallax "wikilink") of Mars that [Johannes
Kepler](Johannes_Kepler "wikilink") used to make a preliminary
calculation of the relative distance to the planet.[^25] From Brahe\'s
observations of Mars, Kepler deduced that the planet orbited the Sun not
in a circle, but in an [ellipse](ellipse "wikilink"). Moreover, Kepler
showed that Mars sped up as it approached the Sun and slowed down as it
moved farther away, in a manner that later physicists would explain as a
consequence of the [conservation of angular
momentum](conservation_of_angular_momentum "wikilink").[^26] When the
telescope became available, the diurnal parallax of Mars was again
measured in an effort to determine the Sun-Earth distance. This was
first performed by [Giovanni Domenico
Cassini](Giovanni_Domenico_Cassini "wikilink") in 1672. The early
parallax measurements were hampered by the quality of the
instruments.[^27] The only [occultation](occultation "wikilink") of Mars
by Venus observed was that of 13 October 1590, seen by [Michael
Maestlin](Michael_Maestlin "wikilink") at
[Heidelberg](Heidelberg "wikilink").[^28] In 1610, Mars was viewed by
Italian astronomer [Galileo Galilei](Galileo_Galilei "wikilink"), who
was first to see it via telescope.[^29] The first person to draw a map
of Mars that displayed any terrain features was the Dutch astronomer
[Christiaan Huygens](Christiaan_Huygens "wikilink").[^30]

### Martian \"canals\"

By the 19th century, the resolution of telescopes reached a level
sufficient for surface features to be identified. On 5 September 1877, a
perihelic opposition of Mars occurred. The Italian astronomer [Giovanni
Schiaparelli](Giovanni_Schiaparelli "wikilink") used a telescope in
[Milan](Milan "wikilink") to help produce the first detailed map of
Mars. These maps notably contained features he called *canali*, which
were later shown to be an [optical
illusion](optical_illusion "wikilink"). These *canali* were supposedly
long, straight lines on the surface of Mars, to which he gave names of
famous rivers on Earth. His term, which means \"channels\" or
\"grooves\", was popularly mistranslated in English as
\"canals\".[^31][^32]

Influenced by the observations, the orientalist [Percival
Lowell](Percival_Lowell "wikilink") founded [an
observatory](Lowell_Observatory "wikilink") which had 30- and
45-centimetre (12- and 18-in) telescopes. The observatory was used for
the exploration of Mars during the last good opportunity in 1894 and the
following less favorable oppositions. He published several books on Mars
and life on the planet, which had a great influence on the
public.[^33][^34] The *canali* were independently observed by other
astronomers, like [Henri Joseph
Perrotin](Henri_Joseph_Perrotin "wikilink") and [Louis
Thollon](Louis_Thollon "wikilink") in Nice, using one of the largest
telescopes of that time.[^35][^36]

The seasonal changes (consisting of the diminishing of the polar caps
and the dark areas formed during Martian summer) in combination with the
canals led to speculation about life on Mars, and it was a long-held
belief that Mars contained vast seas and vegetation. As bigger
telescopes were used, fewer long, straight *canali* were observed.
During observations in 1909 by [Antoniadi](Antoniadi "wikilink") with an
telescope, irregular patterns were observed, but no *canali* were
seen.[^37]

Physical characteristics
------------------------

Mars is approximately half the diameter of Earth, with a surface area
only slightly less than the total area of Earth\'s dry land.[^38] Mars
is less dense than Earth, having about 15% of Earth\'s volume and 11% of
Earth\'s [mass](mass "wikilink"), resulting in about 38% of Earth\'s
surface gravity. The red-orange appearance of the Martian surface is
caused by [iron(III) oxide](iron(III)_oxide "wikilink"), or rust.[^39]
It can look like [butterscotch](butterscotch "wikilink");[^40] other
common surface colors include golden, brown, tan, and greenish,
depending on the [minerals](mineral "wikilink") present.[^41]

### Internal structure

Like Earth, Mars has
[differentiated](planetary_differentiation "wikilink") into a dense
metallic [core](Planetary_core "wikilink") overlaid by less dense
materials.[^42][^43] Current models of its interior imply a core
consisting primarily of [iron and nickel](iron–nickel_alloy "wikilink")
with about 16--17% [sulfur](sulfur "wikilink").[^44] This [iron(II)
sulfide](iron(II)_sulfide "wikilink") core is thought to be twice as
rich in lighter elements as Earth\'s.[^45] The core is surrounded by a
silicate [mantle](mantle_(geology) "wikilink") that formed many of the
[tectonic](Tectonics_of_Mars "wikilink") and volcanic features on the
planet, but it appears to be dormant. Besides silicon and oxygen, the
most abundant elements in the Martian
[crust](crust_(geology) "wikilink") are [iron](iron "wikilink"),
[magnesium](magnesium "wikilink"), [aluminium](aluminium "wikilink"),
[calcium](calcium "wikilink"), and [potassium](potassium "wikilink").
The average thickness of the planet\'s crust is about , with a maximum
thickness of .[^46] By comparison, Earth\'s crust averages in
thickness.[^47]

Mars is seismically active. [InSight](InSight "wikilink") has detected
and recorded over 450 [marsquakes](marsquake "wikilink") and related
events in 2019.[^48][^49] In 2021 it was reported that based on eleven
low-frequency Marsquakes detected by the *InSight* lander the core of
Mars is indeed liquid and has a radius of about and a temperature around
1900--2000 K. The Martian core radius is more than half the radius of
Mars and about half the size of the Earth\'s core. This is somewhat
larger than models predicted, suggesting that the core contains some
amount of lighter [elements](Chemical_element "wikilink") like
[oxygen](oxygen "wikilink") and [hydrogen](hydrogen "wikilink") in
addition to the iron--nickel alloy and about 15% of sulfur.[^50][^51]

The core of Mars is overlaid by the rocky mantle, which, however, does
not seem to have a layer analogous to the Earth\'s [lower
mantle](lower_mantle "wikilink"). The Martian mantle appears to be solid
down to the depth of about 500 km, where the [low-velocity
zone](low-velocity_zone "wikilink") (partially melted
[asthenosphere](asthenosphere "wikilink")) begins.[^52] Below the
asthenosphere the velocity of seismic waves starts to grow again and at
the depth of about 1050 km there lies the boundary of the [transition
zone](Transition_zone_(Earth) "wikilink").[^53] At the surface of Mars
there lies a crust with the average thickness of about 24--72 km.[^54]

### Surface geology

([USGS](USGS "wikilink"),
2014)[^55]\|left\|338x338px](USGS-MarsMap-sim3292-20140714-crop.png "Geologic map of Mars (USGS, 2014)|left|338x338px")

Mars is a [terrestrial planet](terrestrial_planet "wikilink") with a
surface that consists of minerals containing
[silicon](silicon "wikilink") and oxygen, [metals](metal "wikilink"),
and other elements that typically make up
[rock](rock_(geology) "wikilink"). The Martian surface is primarily
composed of [tholeiitic](Tholeiitic_magma_series "wikilink")
[basalt](basalt "wikilink"),[^56] although parts are more
[silica](silica "wikilink")-rich than typical basalt and may be similar
to [andesitic](andesitic "wikilink") rocks on Earth, or silica glass.
Regions of low [albedo](albedo "wikilink") suggest concentrations of
[plagioclase feldspar](plagioclase_feldspar "wikilink"), with northern
low albedo regions displaying higher than normal concentrations of sheet
silicates and high-silicon glass. Parts of the southern highlands
include detectable amounts of high-calcium
[pyroxenes](pyroxenes "wikilink"). Localized concentrations of
[hematite](hematite "wikilink") and [olivine](olivine "wikilink") have
been found.[^57] Much of the surface is deeply covered by finely grained
[iron(III) oxide](iron(III)_oxide "wikilink") dust.[^58]

Although Mars has no evidence of a structured [global magnetic
field](Magnetic_field_of_Mars "wikilink"),[^59] observations show that
parts of the planet\'s crust have been magnetized, suggesting that
alternating polarity reversals of its dipole field have occurred in the
past. This [paleomagnetism](paleomagnetism "wikilink") of magnetically
susceptible minerals is similar to the [alternating bands found on
Earth\'s ocean floors](Plate_tectonics "wikilink"). One theory,
published in 1999 and re-examined in October 2005 (with the help of the
*[Mars Global Surveyor](Mars_Global_Surveyor "wikilink")*), is that
these bands suggest [plate tectonic
activity](Plate_tectonics "wikilink") on Mars four billion years ago,
before the planetary [dynamo](Dynamo_theory "wikilink") ceased to
function and the planet\'s magnetic field faded.[^60]

Scientists have theorized that during the [Solar System\'s
formation](Formation_and_evolution_of_the_Solar_System "wikilink") Mars
was created as the result of a [random
process](stochastic_process "wikilink") of run-away accretion of
material from the [protoplanetary disk](protoplanetary_disk "wikilink")
that orbited the Sun. Mars has many distinctive chemical features caused
by its position in the Solar System. Elements with comparatively low
boiling points, such as [chlorine](chlorine "wikilink"),
[phosphorus](phosphorus "wikilink"), and [sulfur](sulfur "wikilink"),
are much more common on Mars than Earth; these elements were probably
pushed outward by the young Sun\'s energetic [solar
wind](solar_wind "wikilink").[^61]

After the formation of the planets, all were subjected to the so-called
\"[Late Heavy Bombardment](Late_Heavy_Bombardment "wikilink")\". About
60% of the surface of Mars shows a record of impacts from that
era,[^62][^63][^64] whereas much of the remaining surface is probably
underlain by immense impact basins caused by those events. There is
evidence of an enormous impact basin in the Northern Hemisphere of Mars,
spanning , or roughly four times the size of the Moon\'s [South Pole --
Aitken basin](South_Pole_–_Aitken_basin "wikilink"), the largest impact
basin yet discovered.[^65] This theory suggests that Mars was struck by
a [Pluto](Pluto "wikilink")-sized body about four billion years ago. The
event, thought to be the cause of the [Martian hemispheric
dichotomy](Martian_hemispheric_dichotomy "wikilink"), created the smooth
[Borealis basin](Borealis_basin "wikilink") that covers 40% of the
planet.[^66][^67]

The geological history of Mars can be split into many periods, but the
following are the three primary periods:[^68][^69]

-   [Noachian](Noachian "wikilink") period: Formation of the oldest
    extant surfaces of Mars, 4.5 to 3.5 billion years ago. Noachian age
    surfaces are scarred by many large impact craters. The
    [Tharsis](Tharsis "wikilink") bulge, a volcanic upland, is thought
    to have formed during this period, with extensive flooding by liquid
    water late in the period. Named after [Noachis
    Terra](Noachis_Terra "wikilink").[^70]
-   [Hesperian](Hesperian "wikilink") period: 3.5 to between 3.3 and
    2.9 billion years ago. The Hesperian period is marked by the
    formation of extensive lava plains. Named after [Hesperia
    Planum](Hesperia_Planum "wikilink").[^71]
-   [Amazonian](Amazonian_(Mars) "wikilink") period: between 3.3 and
    2.9 billion years ago to the present. Amazonian regions have few
    [meteorite impact](impact_event "wikilink") craters but are
    otherwise quite varied. [Olympus Mons](Olympus_Mons "wikilink")
    formed during this period, with lava flows elsewhere on Mars. Named
    after [Amazonis Planitia](Amazonis_Planitia "wikilink").[^72]

Geological activity is still taking place on Mars. The [Athabasca
Valles](Athabasca_Valles "wikilink") is home to sheet-like lava flows
created about 200 [mya](myr "wikilink"). Water flows in the
[grabens](graben "wikilink") called the [Cerberus
Fossae](Cerberus_Fossae "wikilink") occurred less than 20 Mya,
indicating equally recent volcanic intrusions.[^73] The *[Mars
Reconnaissance Orbiter](Mars_Reconnaissance_Orbiter "wikilink")* has
captured images of avalanches.[^74][^75]

### Soil

soil and boulders after crossing the \"Dingo Gap\" [sand
dune](sand_dune "wikilink")](PIA17944-MarsCuriosityRover-AfterCrossingDingoGapSanddune-20140209.jpg "fig:Curiosity{{'s}} view of Martian soil and boulders after crossing the "Dingo Gap" sand dune")
The *[Phoenix](Phoenix_(spacecraft) "wikilink")* lander returned data
showing Martian soil to be slightly alkaline and containing elements
such as [magnesium](magnesium "wikilink"), [sodium](sodium "wikilink"),
[potassium](potassium "wikilink") and [chlorine](chlorine "wikilink").
These nutrients are found in soils on Earth. They are necessary for
growth of plants.[^76] Experiments performed by the lander showed that
the Martian soil has a [basic](Base_(chemistry) "wikilink")
[pH](pH "wikilink") of 7.7, and contains 0.6% of the
[salt](salt_(chemistry) "wikilink")
[perchlorate](perchlorate "wikilink"),[^77][^78] concentrations that are
[toxic to humans](Martian_soil#Toxicity "wikilink").[^79][^80]

[Streaks](Dark_slope_streak "wikilink") are common across Mars and new
ones appear frequently on steep slopes of craters, troughs, and valleys.
The streaks are dark at first and get lighter with age. The streaks can
start in a tiny area, then spread out for hundreds of metres. They have
been seen to follow the edges of boulders and other obstacles in their
path. The commonly accepted theories include that they are dark
underlying layers of soil revealed after avalanches of bright dust or
[dust devils](dust_devil "wikilink").[^81] Several other explanations
have been put forward, including those that involve water or even the
growth of organisms.[^82][^83]

### Hydrology

Water in its liquid form cannot exist on the surface of Mars due to low
atmospheric pressure, which is less than 1% that of Earth\'s,[^84]
except at the lowest elevations for short periods.[^85][^86] The two
polar ice caps appear to be made largely of water.[^87][^88] The volume
of water ice in the south polar ice cap, if melted, would be enough to
cover the entire surface of the planet with a depth of .[^89] [Large
quantities of
ice](Water_on_terrestrial_planets_of_the_Solar_System "wikilink") are
thought to be trapped within the thick
[cryosphere](cryosphere "wikilink") of Mars. Radar data from *[Mars
Express](Mars_Express "wikilink")* and the *[Mars Reconnaissance
Orbiter](Mars_Reconnaissance_Orbiter "wikilink")* (MRO) show large
quantities of ice at both poles,[^90][^91] and at middle latitudes.[^92]
The Phoenix lander directly sampled water ice in shallow Martian soil on
31 July 2008.[^93]

[Landforms](Geomorphology "wikilink") visible on Mars strongly suggest
that liquid water has existed on the planet\'s surface. Huge linear
swathes of scoured ground, known as [outflow
channels](outflow_channels "wikilink"), cut across the surface in about
25 places. These are thought to be a record of erosion caused by the
catastrophic release of water from subsurface aquifers, though some of
these structures have been hypothesized to result from the action of
glaciers or lava.[^94][^95] One of the larger examples, [Ma\'adim
Vallis](Ma'adim_Vallis "wikilink"), is long, much greater than the Grand
Canyon, with a width of and a depth of in places. It is thought to have
been carved by flowing water early in Mars\'s history.[^96] The youngest
of these channels are thought to have formed only a few million years
ago.[^97] Elsewhere, particularly on the oldest areas of the Martian
surface, finer-scale, dendritic [networks of
valleys](Valley_networks_(Mars) "wikilink") are spread across
significant proportions of the landscape. Features of these valleys and
their distribution strongly imply that they were carved by
[runoff](surface_runoff "wikilink") resulting from precipitation in
early Mars history. Subsurface water flow and [groundwater
sapping](groundwater_sapping "wikilink") may play important subsidiary
roles in some networks, but precipitation was probably the root cause of
the incision in almost all cases.[^98]

Along crater and canyon walls, there are thousands of features that
appear similar to terrestrial [gullies](gullies "wikilink"). The gullies
tend to be in the highlands of the Southern Hemisphere and to face the
Equator; all are poleward of 30° latitude. A number of authors have
suggested that their formation process involves liquid water, probably
from melting ice,[^99][^100] although others have argued for formation
mechanisms involving carbon dioxide frost or the movement of dry
dust.[^101][^102] No partially degraded gullies have formed by
weathering and no superimposed impact craters have been observed,
indicating that these are young features, possibly still active.[^103]
Other geological features, such as [deltas](River_delta "wikilink") and
[alluvial fans](alluvial_fans "wikilink") preserved in craters, are
further evidence for warmer, wetter conditions at an interval or
intervals in earlier Mars history.[^104] Such conditions necessarily
require the widespread presence of [crater
lakes](Volcanic_crater_lake "wikilink") across a large proportion of the
surface, for which there is independent mineralogical, sedimentological
and geomorphological evidence.[^105] Further evidence that liquid water
once existed on the surface of Mars comes from the detection of specific
minerals such as [hematite](hematite "wikilink") and
[goethite](goethite "wikilink"), both of which sometimes form in the
presence of water.[^106]

that appears bright blue in this enhanced-color view from the
[MRO](Mars_Reconnaissance_Orbiter "wikilink").](Mars_exposed_subsurface_ice.jpg "A cross-section of underground water ice is exposed at the steep slope that appears bright blue in this enhanced-color view from the MRO.")

#### Observations and findings of water evidence

In 2004, *Opportunity* detected the mineral
[jarosite](jarosite "wikilink"). This forms only in the presence of
acidic water, showing that water once existed on Mars.[^107][^108] The
*Spirit* rover found concentrated deposits of
[silica](silica "wikilink") in 2007 that indicated wet conditions in the
past, and in December 2011, the mineral [gypsum](gypsum "wikilink"),
which also forms in the presence of water, was found on the surface by
NASA\'s Mars rover Opportunity.[^109][^110][^111] It is estimated that
the amount of water in the upper mantle of Mars, represented by
[hydroxyl ions](hydroxyl_ion "wikilink") contained within Martian
minerals, is equal to or greater than that of Earth at 50--300 parts per
million of water, which is enough to cover the entire planet to a depth
of .[^112][^113]

On 18 March 2013, [NASA](NASA "wikilink") reported evidence from
instruments on the [*Curiosity* rover](Curiosity_(rover) "wikilink") of
[mineral hydration](mineral_hydration "wikilink"), likely hydrated
[calcium sulfate](calcium_sulfate "wikilink"), in several [rock
samples](Rock_(geology) "wikilink") including the broken fragments of
[\"Tintina\" rock](Tintina_(rock) "wikilink") and [\"Sutton Inlier\"
rock](List_of_rocks_on_Mars#Curiosity "wikilink") as well as in
[veins](vein_(geology) "wikilink") and
[nodules](nodule_(geology) "wikilink") in other rocks like [\"Knorr\"
rock](List_of_rocks_on_Mars#Curiosity "wikilink") and [\"Wernicke\"
rock](List_of_rocks_on_Mars#Curiosity "wikilink").[^114][^115] Analysis
using the rover\'s [DAN
instrument](Curiosity_(rover)#Dynamic_Albedo_of_Neutrons_(DAN) "wikilink")
provided evidence of subsurface water, amounting to as much as 4% water
content, down to a depth of , during the rover\'s traverse from the
*[Bradbury Landing](Bradbury_Landing "wikilink")* site to the
*Yellowknife Bay* area in the *[Glenelg](Glenelg,_Mars "wikilink")*
terrain.[^116] In September 2015, NASA announced that they had found
strong evidence of hydrated [brine](brine "wikilink") flows in
[recurring slope lineae](recurring_slope_lineae "wikilink"), based on
spectrometer readings of the darkened areas of slopes.[^117][^118][^119]
These streaks flow downhill in Martian summer, when the temperature is
above −23° Celsius, and freeze at lower temperatures.[^120] These
observations supported earlier hypotheses, based on timing of formation
and their rate of growth, that these dark streaks resulted from water
flowing just below the surface.[^121] However, later work suggested that
the lineae may be dry, granular flows instead, with at most a limited
role for water in initiating the process.[^122] A definitive conclusion
about the presence, extent, and role of liquid water on the Martian
surface remains elusive.[^123][^124]

Researchers suspect much of the low northern plains of the planet were
[covered with an ocean](Mars_ocean_hypothesis "wikilink") hundreds of
meters deep, though this theory remains controversial.[^125] In March
2015, scientists stated that such an ocean might have been the size of
Earth\'s [Arctic Ocean](Arctic_Ocean "wikilink"). This finding was
derived from the ratio of water to [deuterium](deuterium "wikilink") in
the modern Martian atmosphere compared to that ratio on Earth. The
amount of Martian deuterium is eight times the amount that exists on
Earth, suggesting that ancient Mars had significantly higher levels of
water. Results from the *Curiosity* rover had previously found a high
ratio of deuterium in [Gale Crater](Gale_Crater "wikilink"), though not
significantly high enough to suggest the former presence of an ocean.
Other scientists caution that these results have not been confirmed, and
point out that Martian climate models have not yet shown that the planet
was warm enough in the past to support bodies of liquid water.[^126]
Near the northern polar cap is the wide [Korolev
Crater](Korolev_(Martian_crater) "wikilink"), which the [Mars
Express](Mars_Express "wikilink") orbiter found to be filled with
approximately of water ice.[^127]

In November 2016, NASA reported finding a large amount of underground
ice in the [Utopia Planitia](Utopia_Planitia "wikilink") region. The
volume of water detected has been estimated to be equivalent to the
volume of water in [Lake
Superior](Lake_Superior "wikilink").[^128][^129] During observations
from 2018 through 2021, the ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter spotted
indications of water, probably subsurface ice, in the Valles Marineris
canyon system.[^130]

#### Polar caps

Mars has two permanent polar ice caps. During a pole\'s winter, it lies
in continuous darkness, chilling the surface and causing the
[deposition](deposition_(phase_transition) "wikilink") of 25--30% of the
atmosphere into slabs of [CO~2~](Carbon_dioxide "wikilink") ice ([dry
ice](dry_ice "wikilink")).[^131] When the poles are again exposed to
sunlight, the frozen CO~2~ [sublimes](Sublimation_(physics) "wikilink").
These seasonal actions transport large amounts of dust and water vapor,
giving rise to Earth-like frost and large [cirrus
clouds](cirrus_cloud "wikilink"). Clouds of water-ice were photographed
by the *[Opportunity](Opportunity_(rover) "wikilink")* rover in
2004.[^132]

The caps at both poles consist primarily (70%) of water ice. Frozen
carbon dioxide accumulates as a comparatively thin layer about one metre
thick on the north cap in the northern winter only, whereas the south
cap has a permanent dry ice cover about eight metres thick. This
permanent dry ice cover at the south pole is peppered by [flat floored,
shallow, roughly circular pits](Swiss_cheese_features "wikilink"), which
repeat imaging shows are expanding by meters per year; this suggests
that the permanent CO~2~ cover over the south pole water ice is
degrading over time.[^133] The northern polar cap has a diameter of
about ,[^134] and contains about of ice, which, if spread evenly on the
cap, would be thick.[^135] (This compares to a volume of for the
[Greenland ice sheet](Greenland_ice_sheet "wikilink").) The southern
polar cap has a diameter of and a thickness of .[^136] The total volume
of ice in the south polar cap plus the adjacent layered deposits has
been estimated at 1.6 million cubic km.[^137] Both polar caps show
spiral troughs, which recent analysis of [SHARAD](SHARAD "wikilink") ice
penetrating radar has shown are a result of [katabatic
winds](katabatic_wind "wikilink") that spiral due to the [Coriolis
effect](Coriolis_force "wikilink").[^138][^139]

The seasonal frosting of areas near the southern ice cap results in the
formation of transparent 1-metre-thick slabs of dry ice above the
ground. With the arrival of spring, sunlight warms the subsurface and
pressure from subliming CO~2~ builds up under a slab, elevating and
ultimately rupturing it. This leads to [geyser-like
eruptions](Martian_geyser "wikilink") of CO~2~ gas mixed with dark
basaltic sand or dust. This process is rapid, observed happening in the
space of a few days, weeks or months, a rate of change rather unusual in
geology -- especially for Mars. The gas rushing underneath a slab to the
site of a geyser carves a spiderweb-like pattern of radial channels
under the ice, the process being the inverted equivalent of an erosion
network formed by water draining through a single plughole.[^140][^141]

### Geography and names

map showing highlands (red and orange) dominating the Southern
Hemisphere of Mars, lowlands (blue) the northern. Volcanic plateaus
delimit regions of the northern plains, whereas the highlands are
punctuated by several large impact
basins.\|center\|600x600px](Mars_topography_(MOLA_dataset)_with_poles_HiRes.jpg "fig:A MOLA-based topographic map showing highlands (red and orange) dominating the Southern Hemisphere of Mars, lowlands (blue) the northern. Volcanic plateaus delimit regions of the northern plains, whereas the highlands are punctuated by several large impact basins.|center|600x600px")

Although better remembered for mapping the Moon, [Johann Heinrich
Mädler](Johann_Heinrich_Mädler "wikilink") and [Wilhelm
Beer](Wilhelm_Beer "wikilink") were the first areographers. They began
by establishing that most of Mars\'s surface features were permanent and
by more precisely determining the planet\'s rotation period. In 1840,
Mädler combined ten years of observations and drew the first map of
Mars.[^142]

Features on Mars are named from a variety of sources. [Albedo
features](Classical_albedo_features_on_Mars "wikilink") are named for
classical mythology. Craters larger than roughly 50 km are named for
deceased scientists and writers and others who have contributed to the
study of Mars. Smaller craters are named for towns and villages of the
world with populations of less than 100,000. Large valleys are named for
the word \"Mars\" or \"star\" in various languages; small valleys are
named for rivers.[^143]

Large [albedo](albedo "wikilink") features retain many of the older
names but are often updated to reflect new knowledge of the nature of
the features. For example, *Nix Olympica* (the snows of Olympus) has
become *[Olympus Mons](Olympus_Mons "wikilink")* (Mount Olympus).[^144]
The surface of Mars as seen from Earth is divided into two kinds of
areas, with differing albedo. The paler plains covered with dust and
sand rich in reddish iron oxides were once thought of as Martian
\"continents\" and given names like [Arabia
Terra](Arabia_Terra "wikilink") (*land of Arabia*) or [Amazonis
Planitia](Amazonis_Planitia "wikilink") (*Amazonian plain*). The dark
features were thought to be seas, hence their names [Mare
Erythraeum](Mare_Erythraeum "wikilink"), Mare Sirenum and [Aurorae
Sinus](Aurorae_Sinus "wikilink"). The largest dark feature seen from
Earth is [Syrtis Major Planum](Syrtis_Major_Planum "wikilink").[^145]
The permanent northern polar ice cap is named [Planum
Boreum](Planum_Boreum "wikilink"). The southern cap is called [Planum
Australe](Planum_Australe "wikilink").[^146]

Mars\'s equator is defined by its rotation, but the location of its
[Prime Meridian](Prime_Meridian "wikilink") was specified, as was
Earth\'s (at [Greenwich](Greenwich "wikilink")), by choice of an
arbitrary point; Mädler and Beer selected a line for their first maps of
Mars in 1830. After the spacecraft *[Mariner 9](Mariner_9 "wikilink")*
provided extensive imagery of Mars in 1972, a small crater (later called
[Airy-0](Airy-0 "wikilink")), located in the [Sinus
Meridiani](Sinus_Meridiani "wikilink") (\"Middle Bay\" or \"Meridian
Bay\"), was chosen by [Merton Davies](Merton_Davies "wikilink"), [Harold
Masursky](Harold_Masursky "wikilink"), and [Gérard de
Vaucouleurs](Gérard_de_Vaucouleurs "wikilink") for the definition of
0.0° longitude to coincide with the original
selection.[^147][^148][^149]

Because Mars has no oceans and hence no \"[sea
level](sea_level "wikilink")\", a zero-elevation surface had to be
selected as a reference level; this is called the
*[areoid](areoid "wikilink")*[^150] of Mars, analogous to the
terrestrial [geoid](geoid "wikilink").[^151] Zero altitude was defined
by the height at which there is of atmospheric pressure.[^152] This
pressure corresponds to the [triple point](triple_point "wikilink") of
water, and it is about 0.6% of the sea level surface pressure on Earth
(0.006 atm).[^153]

For mapping purposes, the [United States Geological
Survey](United_States_Geological_Survey "wikilink") divides the surface
of Mars into [thirty cartographic
quadrangles](List_of_quadrangles_on_Mars "wikilink"), each named for a
classical albedo feature it contains.[^154]

#### Volcanoes

Mons](Olympus_Mons "wikilink"). The volcano and related terrain are
approximately
across.\|left](Olympus_Mons_alt.jpg "Viking 1 image of Olympus Mons. The volcano and related terrain are approximately  across.|left")

The [shield volcano](shield_volcano "wikilink") [Olympus
Mons](Olympus_Mons "wikilink") (*Mount Olympus*) is an extinct volcano
in the vast upland region [Tharsis](Tharsis "wikilink"), which contains
several other large volcanoes. The edifice is over wide.[^155][^156]
Because the mountain is so large, with complex structure at its edges,
allocating a height to it is difficult. Its local relief, from the foot
of the cliffs which form its northwest margin to its peak, is over
,[^157] a little over twice the height of [Mauna
Kea](Mauna_Kea "wikilink") as measured from its base on the ocean floor.
The total elevation change from the plains of [Amazonis
Planitia](Amazonis_Planitia "wikilink"), over to the northwest, to the
summit approaches ,[^158] roughly three times the height of [Mount
Everest](Mount_Everest "wikilink"), which in comparison stands at just
over . Consequently, Olympus Mons is either the [tallest or
second-tallest mountain in the Solar
System](List_of_tallest_mountains_in_the_Solar_System "wikilink"); the
only known mountain which might be taller is the
[Rheasilvia](Rheasilvia "wikilink") peak on the asteroid
[Vesta](4_Vesta "wikilink"), at .[^159]

#### Impact topography

The [dichotomy](Martian_dichotomy "wikilink") of Martian topography is
striking: northern plains flattened by lava flows contrast with the
southern highlands, pitted and cratered by ancient impacts. It is
possible that, four billion years ago, the Northern Hemisphere of Mars
was struck by an object one-tenth to two-thirds the size of Earth\'s
[Moon](Moon "wikilink"). If this is the case, the Northern Hemisphere of
Mars would be the site of an [impact crater](impact_crater "wikilink")
in size, or roughly the area of Europe, Asia, and Australia combined,
surpassing [Utopia Planitia](Utopia_Planitia "wikilink") and the Moon\'s
[South Pole--Aitken basin](South_Pole–Aitken_basin "wikilink") as the
largest impact crater in the Solar System.[^160][^161][^162]

Mars is scarred by a number of impact craters: a total of 43,000 craters
with a diameter of or greater have been found.[^163] The largest exposed
crater is [Hellas](Hellas_Planitia "wikilink"), which is wide and deep,
and is a light [albedo feature](albedo_feature "wikilink") clearly
visible from Earth.[^164][^165] There are other notable impact features,
such as [Argyre](Argyre_Planitia "wikilink"), which is around in
diameter,[^166] and [Isidis](Isidis_Planitia "wikilink"), which is
around in diameter.[^167] Due to the smaller mass and size of Mars, the
probability of an object colliding with the planet is about half that of
Earth. Mars is located closer to the [asteroid
belt](asteroid_belt "wikilink"), so it has an increased chance of being
struck by materials from that source. Mars is more likely to be struck
by short-period [comets](comet "wikilink"), *i.e.*, those that lie
within the orbit of [Jupiter](Jupiter "wikilink").[^168]

Martian craters can have a morphology that suggests the ground became
wet after the meteor impacted.[^169]

#### Tectonic sites

1](Viking_1 "wikilink")*
probe](Mars_Valles_Marineris.jpeg "fig:Valles Marineris, taken by the Viking 1 probe")
The large canyon, [Valles Marineris](Valles_Marineris "wikilink") (Latin
for \"[Mariner](Mariner_program "wikilink") Valleys\", also known as
Agathodaemon in the old canal maps[^170]), has a length of and a depth
of up to . The length of Valles Marineris is equivalent to the length of
Europe and extends across one-fifth the circumference of Mars. By
comparison, the [Grand Canyon](Grand_Canyon "wikilink") on Earth is only
long and nearly deep. Valles Marineris was formed due to the swelling of
the Tharsis area, which caused the crust in the area of Valles Marineris
to collapse. In 2012, it was proposed that Valles Marineris is not just
a [graben](graben "wikilink"), but a plate boundary where of [transverse
motion](Transform_fault "wikilink") has occurred, making Mars a planet
with possibly a two-[tectonic plate](tectonic_plate "wikilink")
arrangement.[^171][^172]

#### Holes

Images from the [Thermal Emission Imaging
System](Thermal_Emission_Imaging_System "wikilink") (THEMIS) aboard
NASA\'s [Mars Odyssey orbiter](2001_Mars_Odyssey "wikilink") have
revealed seven possible [cave](cave "wikilink") entrances on the flanks
of the volcano [Arsia Mons](Arsia_Mons "wikilink").[^173] The caves,
named after loved ones of their discoverers, are collectively known as
the \"seven sisters\".[^174] Cave entrances measure from wide and they
are estimated to be at least deep. Because light does not reach the
floor of most of the caves, it is possible that they extend much deeper
than these lower estimates and widen below the surface. \"Dena\" is the
only exception; its floor is visible and was measured to be deep. The
interiors of these caverns may be protected from micrometeoroids, UV
radiation, [solar flares](solar_flare "wikilink") and high energy
particles that bombard the planet\'s surface.[^175][^176]

### Atmosphere

probe](Mars_atmosphere.jpg "fig:Edge-on view of Mars atmosphere by Viking 1 probe")
Mars lost its [magnetosphere](magnetosphere "wikilink") 4 billion years
ago,[^177] possibly because of numerous asteroid strikes,[^178] so the
[solar wind](solar_wind "wikilink") interacts directly with the Martian
[ionosphere](ionosphere "wikilink"), lowering the atmospheric density by
[stripping](atmospheric_stripping "wikilink") away atoms from the outer
layer.[^179] Both *[Mars Global
Surveyor](Mars_Global_Surveyor "wikilink")* and *[Mars
Express](Mars_Express "wikilink")* have detected ionised atmospheric
particles trailing off into space behind Mars,[^180][^181] and this
atmospheric loss is being studied by the [MAVEN](MAVEN "wikilink")
orbiter. Compared to Earth, the
[atmosphere](celestial_body_atmosphere "wikilink") of Mars is quite
rarefied. [Atmospheric pressure](Atmospheric_pressure "wikilink") on the
surface today ranges from a low of on [Olympus
Mons](Olympus_Mons "wikilink") to over in [Hellas
Planitia](Hellas_Planitia "wikilink"), with a mean pressure at the
surface level of .[^182] The highest atmospheric density on Mars is
equal to that found [^183] above Earth\'s surface. The resulting mean
surface pressure is only 0.6% of that of Earth . The [scale
height](scale_height "wikilink") of the atmosphere is about ,[^184]
which is higher than Earth\'s , because the surface [gravity of
Mars](gravity_of_Mars "wikilink") is only about 38% of Earth\'s.[^185]

The atmosphere of Mars consists of about 96% [carbon
dioxide](carbon_dioxide "wikilink"), 1.93% [argon](argon "wikilink") and
1.89% [nitrogen](nitrogen "wikilink") along with traces of
[oxygen](oxygen "wikilink") and water.[^186][^187][^188] The atmosphere
is quite dusty, containing particulates about 1.5 [µm](µm "wikilink") in
diameter which give the Martian sky a [tawny](tawny_(color) "wikilink")
color when seen from the surface.[^189] It may take on a
[pink](pink "wikilink") hue due to [iron oxide](iron_oxide "wikilink")
particles suspended in it.[^190] The concentration of [methane in the
Martian atmosphere](Methane_on_Mars "wikilink") fluctuates from about
0.24 [ppb](Parts_per_billion "wikilink") during the northern winter to
about 0.65 ppb during the summer.[^191] Estimates of its lifetime range
from 0.6 to 4 years,[^192][^193] so its presence indicates that an
active source of the gas must be present. Methane could be produced by
non-biological process such as
[serpentinization](serpentinite "wikilink") involving water, carbon
dioxide, and the mineral [olivine](olivine "wikilink"), which is known
to be common on Mars,[^194] or by Martian
life.[^195][thumb\|upright=1.35\|[Escaping
atmosphere](Atmosphere_of_Mars "wikilink") on Mars
([carbon](carbon "wikilink"), [oxygen](oxygen "wikilink"), and
[hydrogen](hydrogen "wikilink")) by [MAVEN](MAVEN "wikilink") in
[UV](Ultraviolet–visible_spectroscopy "wikilink")[^196]\|300x300px](File:PIA18613-MarsMAVEN-Atmosphere-3UV-Views-20141014.jpg "wikilink")

Compared to Earth, its higher concentration of atmospheric CO~2~ and
lower surface pressure may be why sound is attenuated more on Mars,
where natural sources are rare apart from the wind. Using acoustic
recordings collected by the *Perseverance* rover, researchers concluded
that the speed of sound there is approximately 240 m/s for frequencies
below 240 Hz, and 250 m/s for those above.[^197][^198]

[Auroras](Aurora_on_Mars "wikilink") have been detected on
Mars.[^199][^200][^201] Because Mars lacks a global magnetic field, the
types and distribution of auroras there differ from those on
Earth;[^202] rather than being mostly restricted to polar regions, a
Martian aurora can encompass the planet.[^203] In September 2017, NASA
reported [radiation](radiation "wikilink") levels on the surface of the
planet Mars were temporarily
[doubled](Orders_of_magnitude_(radiation) "wikilink"), and were
associated with an [aurora](aurora "wikilink") 25 times brighter than
any observed earlier, due to a massive, and unexpected, [solar
storm](Coronal_mass_ejection "wikilink") in the middle of the
month.[^204][^205]

### Climate

Of all the planets in the Solar System, the seasons of Mars are the most
Earth-like, due to the similar tilts of the two planets\' rotational
axes. The lengths of the Martian seasons are about twice those of
Earth\'s because Mars\'s greater distance from the Sun leads to the
Martian year being about two Earth years long. Martian surface
temperatures vary from lows of about to highs of up to in equatorial
summer.[^206] The wide range in temperatures is due to the thin
atmosphere which cannot store much solar heat, the low atmospheric
pressure, and the low [thermal
inertia](Volumetric_heat_capacity "wikilink") of Martian soil.[^207] The
planet is 1.52 times as far from the Sun as Earth, resulting in just 43%
of the amount of sunlight.[^208][^209]

If Mars had an Earth-like orbit, its seasons would be similar to
Earth\'s because its [axial tilt](axial_tilt "wikilink") is similar to
Earth\'s. The comparatively large
[eccentricity](Orbital_eccentricity "wikilink") of the Martian orbit has
a significant effect. Mars is near [perihelion](Apsis "wikilink") when
it is summer in the Southern Hemisphere and winter in the north, and
near [aphelion](Apsis "wikilink") when it is winter in the Southern
Hemisphere and summer in the north. As a result, the seasons in the
Southern Hemisphere are more extreme and the seasons in the northern are
milder than would otherwise be the case. The summer temperatures in the
south can be warmer than the equivalent summer temperatures in the north
by up to .[^210]

Mars has the largest [dust storms](dust_storm "wikilink") in the Solar
System, reaching speeds of over . These can vary from a storm over a
small area, to gigantic storms that cover the entire planet. They tend
to occur when Mars is closest to the Sun, and have been shown to
increase the global temperature.[^211]

Orbit and rotation
------------------

planets](Solar_system_orrery_inner_planets.gif "fig:Orbit of Mars and other Inner Solar System planets")
Mars\'s average distance from the Sun is roughly , and its orbital
period is 687 (Earth) days. The solar day (or
[sol](Mars_sol "wikilink")) on Mars is only slightly longer than an
Earth day: 24 hours, 39 minutes, and 35.244 seconds.[^212] A Martian
year is equal to 1.8809 Earth years, or 1 year, 320 days, and 18.2
hours.[^213]

The axial tilt of Mars is 25.19° relative to its [orbital
plane](orbital_plane "wikilink"), which is similar to the axial tilt of
Earth.[^214] As a result, Mars has seasons like Earth, though on Mars
they are nearly twice as long because its orbital period is that much
longer. In the present day epoch, the orientation of the [north
pole](north_pole "wikilink") of Mars is close to the star
[Deneb](Deneb "wikilink").[^215]

Mars has a relatively pronounced [orbital
eccentricity](orbital_eccentricity "wikilink") of about 0.09; of the
seven other planets in the Solar System, only
[Mercury](Mercury_(planet) "wikilink") has a larger orbital
eccentricity. It is known that in the past, Mars has had a much more
circular orbit. At one point, 1.35 million Earth years ago, Mars had an
eccentricity of roughly 0.002, much less than that of Earth today.[^216]
Mars\'s [cycle of eccentricity](Milankovitch_cycles "wikilink") is
96,000 Earth years compared to Earth\'s cycle of 100,000 years.[^217]

Mars approaches Earth in a [synodic period](synodic_period "wikilink")
of 779.94 days. Earth orbits the Sun the closest to Mars\'s orbit around
the Sun, and Mars orbit is the second closest to Earth after the [orbit
of Venus](orbit_of_Venus "wikilink"). Therefore their closest
approaches, the [inferior
conjunctions](inferior_conjunction "wikilink"), are the second closest
for Earth after those with Venus, and the closest for Mars to any other
planet. The [gravitational
potential](gravitational_potential "wikilink") difference, and thus the
[delta-v needed](Delta-v_budget "wikilink") to
[transfer](Transfer_orbit "wikilink") between Mars and Earth is the
second lowest for Earth and the lowest for Mars to any other planet,
while transfers can possibly be optimized with Venus
[flybys](Flyby_(spaceflight) "wikilink").[^218][^219]

Habitability and search for life
--------------------------------

drill in place, February
2013](MarsCuriosityRover-Drilling-Sol170++-2.jpg "fig:Curiosity’s robotic arm showing drill in place, February 2013")
During the late nineteenth century, it was widely accepted in the
astronomical community that Mars had life-supporting qualities,
including the presence of oxygen and water. However, in 1894 [W. W.
Campbell](William_Wallace_Campbell "wikilink") at [Lick
Observatory](Lick_Observatory "wikilink") observed the planet and found
that \"if water vapor or oxygen occur in the atmosphere of Mars it is in
quantities too small to be detected by spectroscopes then available\".
That observation contradicted many of the measurements of the time and
was not widely accepted. Campbell and [V. M.
Slipher](Vesto_Slipher "wikilink") repeated the study in 1909 using
better instruments, but with the same results. It wasn\'t until the
findings were confirmed by [W. S. Adams](Walter_Sydney_Adams "wikilink")
in 1925 that the myth of the Earth-like habitability of Mars was finally
broken.[^220] However, even in the 1960s, articles were published on
Martian biology, putting aside explanations other than life for the
seasonal changes on Mars. Detailed scenarios for the metabolism and
chemical cycles for a functional ecosystem were being published as late
as 1962.[^221]

The current understanding of [planetary
habitability](planetary_habitability "wikilink")the ability of a world
to develop environmental conditions favorable to the emergence of
lifefavors planets that have liquid water on their surface. Most often
this requires the orbit of a planet to lie within the [habitable
zone](circumstellar_habitable_zone "wikilink"), which for the Sun is
estimated to extend from within the orbit of Earth to about that of
Mars.[^222] During perihelion, Mars dips inside this region, but Mars\'s
thin (low-pressure) atmosphere prevents liquid water from existing over
large regions for extended periods. The past flow of liquid water
demonstrates the planet\'s potential for habitability. Recent evidence
has suggested that any water on the Martian surface may have been too
salty and acidic to support regular terrestrial life.[^223]

The lack of a magnetosphere and the extremely thin atmosphere of Mars
are a challenge to sustaining organic life: the planet has little [heat
transfer](heat_transfer "wikilink") across its surface, poor insulation
against bombardment of the [solar wind](solar_wind "wikilink") and
insufficient atmospheric pressure to retain water in a liquid form
(water instead [sublimes](Sublimation_(phase_transition) "wikilink") to
a gaseous state). Mars is nearly, or perhaps totally, geologically dead;
the end of volcanic activity has apparently stopped the recycling of
chemicals and minerals between the surface and interior of the
2012](PIA16226-MarsCuriosityRover-FirstScoopOfSoil-20121007.jpg "fig:Scoop of Mars soil by Curiosity, October 2012"){width="300"
height="300"} *In situ* investigations have been performed on Mars by
the [*Viking* landers](Viking_landers "wikilink"),
*[Spirit](Spirit_(rover) "wikilink")* and *Opportunity* rovers,
*[Phoenix](Phoenix_(spacecraft) "wikilink")* lander, and *Curiosity*
rover. Evidence suggests that the planet was once significantly more
habitable than it is today, but whether living
[organisms](organism "wikilink") ever existed there remains unknown. The
[*Viking* probes](Viking_probes "wikilink") of the mid-1970s carried
experiments designed to detect microorganisms in Martian soil at their
respective landing sites and had positive results, including a temporary
increase of production on exposure to water and nutrients. This sign of
life was later disputed by scientists, resulting in a continuing debate,
with NASA scientist [Gilbert Levin](Gilbert_Levin "wikilink") asserting
that *Viking* may have found life.[^225] Tests conducted by the *Phoenix
Mars* lander have shown that the soil has an
[alkaline](alkaline "wikilink") [pH](pH "wikilink") and it contains
magnesium, sodium, potassium and chloride.[^226] The soil nutrients may
be able to support life, but life would still have to be shielded from
the intense ultraviolet light.[^227] A 2014 analysis of Martian
meteorite EETA79001 found [chlorate](chlorate "wikilink"),
[perchlorate](perchlorate "wikilink"), and [nitrate](nitrate "wikilink")
ions in sufficiently high concentration to suggest that they are
widespread on Mars. UV and X-ray radiation would turn chlorate and
perchlorate ions into other, highly [reactive](redox "wikilink")
[oxychlorines](Oxyanion "wikilink"), indicating that any organic
molecules would have to be buried under the surface to survive.[^228]

Scientists have proposed that carbonate globules found in
[meteorite](meteorite "wikilink")
[ALH84001](Allan_Hills_84001 "wikilink"), which is thought to have
originated from Mars, could be fossilized microbes extant on Mars when
the meteorite was blasted from the Martian surface by a meteor strike
some 15 million years ago. This proposal has been met with skepticism,
and an exclusively inorganic origin for the shapes has been
proposed.[^229] Small quantities of [methane](methane "wikilink") and
[formaldehyde](formaldehyde "wikilink") detected by Mars orbiters are
both claimed to be possible evidence for life, as these [chemical
compounds](chemical_compound "wikilink") would quickly break down in the
Martian atmosphere.[^230][^231] Alternatively, these compounds may
instead be replenished by volcanic or other geological means, such as
[serpentinite](serpentinite "wikilink").[^232] [Impact
glass](Impactite "wikilink"), formed by the impact of meteors, which on
Earth can preserve signs of life, has also been found on the surface of
the impact craters on Mars.[^233][^234] Likewise, the glass in impact
craters on Mars could have preserved signs of life, if life existed at
the site.[^235][^236][^237]

Moons
-----

Mars has two relatively small (compared to Earth\'s) natural moons,
[Phobos](Phobos_(moon) "wikilink") (about in diameter) and
[Deimos](Deimos_(moon) "wikilink") (about in diameter), which orbit
close to the planet. The origin of both moons is unclear, although a
popular theory states that they were asteroids captured into Martian
orbit.[^238]

Both satellites were discovered in 1877 by [Asaph
Hall](Asaph_Hall "wikilink"), and were named after the characters
[Phobos](Phobos_(mythology) "wikilink") (panic/fear) and
[Deimos](Deimos_(mythology) "wikilink") (terror/dread), who, in [Greek
mythology](Greek_mythology "wikilink"), accompanied their father
[Ares](Ares "wikilink"), god of war, into battle.[^239]
[Mars](Mars_(mythology) "wikilink") was the Roman equivalent to Ares. In
modern [Greek](Greek_language "wikilink"), the planet retains its
ancient name *Ares* (Aris: *Άρης*).[^240]

From the surface of Mars, the motions of Phobos and Deimos appear
different from that of the [Moon](Moon "wikilink"). Phobos rises in the
west, sets in the east, and rises again in just 11 hours. Deimos, being
only just outside [synchronous orbit](synchronous_orbit "wikilink")where
the orbital period would match the planet\'s period of rotationrises as
expected in the east but slowly. Because the orbit of Phobos is below
synchronous altitude, [tidal forces](tidal_force "wikilink") from Mars
are gradually lowering its orbit. In about 50 million years, it could
either crash into Mars\'s surface or break up into a ring structure
around the planet.[^241]

### Your task is to print this statement: `The origin of the two moons is not well understood.`

Their low albedo and
[carbonaceous chondrite](carbonaceous_chondrite "wikilink") composition
have been regarded as similar to asteroids, supporting the capture
theory. The unstable orbit of Phobos would seem to point towards a
relatively recent capture. But both have [circular
orbits](circular_orbit "wikilink"), near the equator, which is unusual
for captured objects and the required capture dynamics are complex.
Accretion early in the history of Mars is plausible, but would not
account for a composition resembling asteroids rather than Mars itself,
if that is confirmed.[^242]

A third possibility is the involvement of a third body or a type of
impact disruption. More-recent lines of evidence for Phobos having a
highly porous interior,[^243] and suggesting a composition containing
mainly [phyllosilicates](phyllosilicates "wikilink") and other minerals
known from Mars,[^244] point toward an origin of Phobos from material
ejected by an impact on Mars that reaccreted in Martian orbit, similar
to the [prevailing theory](Giant_impact_hypothesis "wikilink") for the
origin of Earth\'s moon. Although the [visible and
near-infrared](visible_and_near-infrared "wikilink") (VNIR) spectra of
the moons of Mars resemble those of outer-belt asteroids, the [thermal
infrared](thermal_infrared "wikilink") spectra of Phobos are reported to
be inconsistent with [chondrites](chondrite "wikilink") of any
class.[^245] It is also possible that Phobos and Deimos are fragments of
an older moon, formed by debris from a large impact on Mars, and then
destroyed by a more recent impact upon itself.[^246]

Mars may have yet-undiscovered moons smaller than in diameter, and a
dust ring is predicted to exist between Phobos and Deimos.[^247]

Exploration
-----------

preparing for its first
flight](Mars2020_Sol_47_-_NavRight_(51103361344).jpg "fig:Ingenuity helicopter on Mars, preparing for its first flight")
Dozens of crewless [spacecraft](spacecraft "wikilink"), including
[orbiters](orbiter "wikilink"), [landers](Mars_lander "wikilink"), and
[rovers](Mars_rover "wikilink"), have been sent to Mars by the [Soviet
Union](Soviet_space_program "wikilink"), the [United
States](NASA "wikilink"), [Europe](ESA "wikilink"),
[India](ISRO "wikilink"), the [United Arab
Emirates](Mohammed_bin_Rashid_Space_Centre "wikilink"), and
[China](CNSA "wikilink") to study the planet\'s surface, climate, and
geology.[^248] NASA\'s *Mariner 4* was the first spacecraft to visit
Mars; launched on 28 November 1964, it made its closest approach to the
planet on 15 July 1965. *Mariner 4* detected the weak Martian radiation
belt, measured at about 0.1% that of Earth, and captured the first
images of another planet from deep space.[^249]

Once [spacecraft](spacecraft "wikilink") visited the planet during
NASA\'s [Mariner missions](Mariner_program "wikilink") in the 1960s and
1970s, many previous concepts of Mars were radically broken. After the
results of the *Viking* life-detection experiments, the hypothesis of a
hostile, dead planet was generally accepted.[^250] The data from
*Mariner 9* and *Viking* allowed better maps of Mars to be made, and the
*[Mars Global Surveyor](Mars_Global_Surveyor "wikilink")* mission, which
launched in 1996 and operated until late 2006, produced complete,
extremely detailed maps of the Martian topography, magnetic field and
surface minerals.[^251] These maps are available online at websites
including [Google Mars](Google_Mars "wikilink"). Both the *[Mars
Reconnaissance Orbiter](Mars_Reconnaissance_Orbiter "wikilink")* and
*[Mars Express](Mars_Express "wikilink")* continued exploring with new
instruments and supporting lander missions. NASA provides two online
tools: Mars Trek, which provides visualizations of the planet using data
from 50 years of exploration, and [Experience
Curiosity](Experience_Curiosity "wikilink"), which simulates traveling
on Mars in 3-D with *Curiosity*.[^252][^253]

, Mars is host to fourteen functioning
[spacecraft](spacecraft "wikilink"). Eight are in orbit*: [2001 Mars
Odyssey](2001_Mars_Odyssey "wikilink")*, *[Mars
Express](Mars_Express "wikilink")*, *[Mars Reconnaissance
Orbiter](Mars_Reconnaissance_Orbiter "wikilink")*,
*[MAVEN](MAVEN "wikilink")*, *[ExoMars Trace Gas
Orbiter](ExoMars_Trace_Gas_Orbiter "wikilink")*, the
[*Hope*](Emirates_Mars_Mission "wikilink") orbiter, and the
*[Tianwen-1](Tianwen-1 "wikilink")* orbiter.[^254][^255] Another six are
on the surface: the *[InSight](InSight "wikilink")* lander,[^256] the
[Mars Science Laboratory](Mars_Science_Laboratory "wikilink")
*[Curiosity](Curiosity_(rover) "wikilink")* rover, the
*[Perseverance](Perseverance_(rover) "wikilink")* rover, the
*[Ingenuity](Ingenuity_(helicopter) "wikilink")* helicopter, the
*[Tianwen-1](Tianwen-1 "wikilink")* lander, and the
*[Zhurong](Zhurong_(rover) "wikilink")* rover.[^257]

Planned missions to Mars include the *Rosalind Franklin* rover mission,
designed to search for evidence of past life, which was intended to be
launched in 2018 but has been repeatedly delayed, with a launch date
pushed to 2024 at the earliest, with a more likely one sometime in
2028.[^258][^259][^260] A current concept for a joint
[NASA](NASA "wikilink")-[ESA](European_Space_Agency "wikilink") mission
to [return samples from Mars](Mars_sample-return_mission "wikilink")
would launch in 2026.[^261][^262]

Several plans for a [human mission to
Mars](human_mission_to_Mars "wikilink") have been proposed throughout
the 20th and 21st centuries, but none have come to fruition. The NASA
Authorization Act of 2017 directed NASA to study the feasibility of a
crewed Mars mission in the early 2030s; the resulting report eventually
concluded that this would be unfeasible.[^263][^264] In addition, in
2021, China was planning to send a crewed Mars mission in 2033.[^265]
[Privately held companies](Private_spaceflight "wikilink") such as
[SpaceX](SpaceX "wikilink") have also [proposed plans to send humans to
Mars](SpaceX_Mars_program "wikilink"), with the eventual goal to [settle
on the planet](Colonization_of_Mars "wikilink").[^266]

### Astronomy on Mars

as viewed by the [*Perseverance* rover](Perseverance_(rover) "wikilink")
on 2 April
2022](Phobos_transit_in_real_color.webm "fig:Phobos transits the Sun, as viewed by the Perseverance rover on 2 April 2022")
With the presence of various orbiters, landers, and rovers, it is
possible to practice [astronomy](astronomy "wikilink") from Mars.
Although Mars\'s moon [Phobos](Phobos_(moon) "wikilink") appears about
one-third the [angular diameter](angular_diameter "wikilink") of the
[full moon](full_moon "wikilink") on Earth,
[Deimos](Deimos_(moon) "wikilink") appears more or less star-like,
looking only slightly brighter than Venus does from Earth.[^267]

Various phenomena seen from Earth have also been observed from Mars,
such as [meteors](meteor "wikilink") and
[auroras](aurora "wikilink").[^268] The [apparent
sizes](angular_diameter "wikilink") of the moons Phobos and Deimos are
sufficiently smaller than that of the Sun; thus, their partial
\"eclipses\" of the Sun are best considered
[transits](transit_(astronomy) "wikilink") (see [transit of
Deimos](transit_of_Deimos_from_Mars "wikilink") and
[Phobos](transit_of_Phobos_from_Mars "wikilink") from Mars).[^269][^270]
[Transits of Mercury](transit_of_Mercury_from_Mars "wikilink") and
[Venus](transit_of_Venus "wikilink") have been observed from Mars. A
[transit of Earth](transit_of_Earth_from_Mars "wikilink") will be seen
from Mars on 10 November 2084.[^271]

Viewing
-------

opposition](Mars_-_2020_Opposition_(crop).jpg "fig:Mars seen through an 16-inch amateur telescope, at 2020 opposition")
The mean [apparent magnitude](apparent_magnitude "wikilink") of Mars is
+0.71 with a standard deviation of 1.05.[^272] Because the orbit of Mars
is eccentric, the magnitude at
[opposition](opposition_(planets) "wikilink") from the Sun can range
from about −3.0 to −1.4.[^273] The minimum brightness is magnitude +1.86
when the planet is near [aphelion](Apsis "wikilink") and in
[conjunction](conjunction_(astronomy) "wikilink") with the Sun.[^274] At
its brightest, Mars (along with [Jupiter](Jupiter "wikilink")) is second
only to Venus in luminosity.[^275] Mars usually appears distinctly
yellow, orange, or red. When farthest away from Earth, it is more than
seven times farther away than when it is closest. Mars is usually close
enough for particularly good viewing once or twice at 15-year or 17-year
intervals.[^276] As Mars approaches opposition, it begins a period of
[retrograde motion](Apparent_retrograde_motion "wikilink"), which means
it will appear to move backwards in a looping curve with respect to the
background stars. This retrograde motion lasts for about 72 days, and
Mars reaches its peak luminosity in the middle of this interval.[^277]

The point at which Mars\'s geocentric longitude is 180° different from
the Sun\'s is known as [opposition](opposition_(planets) "wikilink"),
which is near the time of closest approach to Earth. The time of
opposition can occur as much as 8.5 days away from the closest approach.
The distance at close approach varies between about due to the planets\'
[elliptical](ellipse "wikilink") orbits, which causes comparable
variation in [angular size](angular_size "wikilink").[^278][^279] The
most recent Mars opposition occurred on 13 October 2020, at a distance
of about .[^280] The average time between the successive oppositions of
Mars, its [synodic period](synodic_period "wikilink"), is 780 days; but
the number of days between the dates of successive oppositions can range
from 764 to 812.[^281]

Mars comes into opposition from Earth every 2.1 years. The planets come
into opposition near Mars\'s [perihelion](perihelion "wikilink") in
2003, 2018 and 2035, with the 2020 and 2033 events being particularly
close to perihelic opposition.[^282][^283] Mars made its closest
approach to Earth and maximum apparent brightness in nearly 60,000
years, , [magnitude](magnitude_(astronomy) "wikilink") −2.88, on 27
August 2003, at 09:51:13 UTC. This occurred when Mars was one day from
opposition and about three days from its perihelion, making it
particularly easy to see from Earth. The last time it came so close is
estimated to have been on 12 September [57,617
BC](Middle_Paleolithic "wikilink"), the next time being in 2287.[^284]
This record approach was only slightly closer than other recent close
approaches.[^285]

Optical ground-based telescopes are typically limited to resolving
features about across when Earth and Mars are closest because of
Earth\'s atmosphere.[^286]

In culture
----------

[thumb\|upright=0.9\|*[The War of the
Worlds](The_War_of_the_Worlds "wikilink")* by [H. G.
Wells](H._G._Wells "wikilink") depicts an [invasion of
Earth](Alien_invasion "wikilink") by fictional aliens from
Mars.\|left](File:War-of-the-worlds-tripod.jpg "wikilink") Mars is named
after the [Roman](Ancient_Rome "wikilink") [god of
war](Mars_(mythology) "wikilink"). This association between Mars and war
dates back at least to [Babylonian
astronomy](Babylonian_astronomy "wikilink"), in which the planet was
named for the god [Nergal](Nergal "wikilink"), deity of war and
destruction.[^287][^288] It persisted into modern times, as exemplified
by [Gustav Holst](Gustav_Holst "wikilink")\'s orchestral suite *[The
Planets](The_Planets "wikilink")*, whose famous first movement labels
Mars \"the bringer of war\".[^289] [The planet\'s
symbol](Gender_symbol "wikilink"), a circle with a spear pointing out to
the upper right, is also used as a symbol for the male gender.[^290] The
symbol dates from at latest the 11th century, though a possible
predecessor has been found in the Greek [Oxyrhynchus
Papyri](Oxyrhynchus_Papyri "wikilink").[^291]

The idea that Mars was populated by intelligent
[Martians](Martian "wikilink") became widespread in the late 19th
century. [Schiaparelli\'s](Giovanni_Schiaparelli "wikilink") \"canali\"
observations combined with [Percival
Lowell](Percival_Lowell "wikilink")\'s books on the subject put forward
the standard notion of a planet that was a drying, cooling, dying world
with ancient civilizations constructing irrigation works.[^292] Many
other observations and proclamations by notable personalities added to
what has been termed \"Mars Fever\".[^293] High-resolution mapping of
the surface of Mars revealed no artifacts of habitation, but
pseudoscientific speculation about intelligent life on Mars still
continues. Reminiscent of the *canali* observations, these speculations
are based on small scale features perceived in the spacecraft images,
such as \"pyramids\" and the \"[Face on
Mars](Cydonia_(Mars) "wikilink")\".[^294] In his book
*[Cosmos](Cosmos_(Sagan_book) "wikilink"),* planetary astronomer [Carl
Sagan](Carl_Sagan "wikilink") wrote: \"Mars has become a kind of mythic
arena onto which we have projected our Earthly hopes and fears.\"[^295]

The depiction of Mars in fiction has been stimulated by its dramatic red
color and by nineteenth-century scientific speculations that its surface
conditions might support not just life but intelligent life.[^296] This
gave way to many [science fiction](science_fiction "wikilink") stories
involving these concepts, such as [H. G.
Wells](H._G._Wells "wikilink")\' *[The War of the
Worlds](The_War_of_the_Worlds "wikilink")*, in which Martians seek to
escape their dying planet by invading Earth, [Ray
Bradbury](Ray_Bradbury "wikilink")\'s *[The Martian
Chronicles](The_Martian_Chronicles "wikilink")*, in which human
explorers accidentally destroy a Martian civilization, as well as [Edgar
Rice Burroughs](Edgar_Rice_Burroughs "wikilink")\' [*Barsoom*
series](Barsoom "wikilink"), [C. S. Lewis](C._S._Lewis "wikilink")\'
novel *[Out of the Silent Planet](Out_of_the_Silent_Planet "wikilink")*
(1938),[^297] and a number of [Robert A.
Heinlein](Robert_A._Heinlein "wikilink") stories before the
mid-sixties.[^298] Since then, depictions of Martians have also extended
to animation. A comic figure of an intelligent Martian, [Marvin the
Martian](Marvin_the_Martian "wikilink"), appeared in *[Haredevil
Hare](Haredevil_Hare "wikilink")* (1948) as a character in the [Looney
Tunes](Looney_Tunes "wikilink") [animated
cartoons](animated_cartoon "wikilink") of [Warner
Brothers](Warner_Brothers "wikilink"), and has continued as part of
popular culture to the present.[^299] After the
[*Mariner*](Mariner_program "wikilink") and
[*Viking*](Viking_program "wikilink") spacecraft had returned pictures
of Mars as it really is, a lifeless and canal-less world, these ideas
about Mars were abandoned; for many science-fiction authors, the new
discoveries initially seemed like a constraint, but eventually the
post-*Viking* knowledge of Mars became itself a source of inspiration
for works like [Kim Stanley
Robinson](Kim_Stanley_Robinson "wikilink")\'s [*Mars*
trilogy](Mars_trilogy "wikilink").[^300]

See also
--------

-   [List of missions to Mars](List_of_missions_to_Mars "wikilink")
-   [Magnetic field of Mars](Magnetic_field_of_Mars "wikilink")
-   [Mars monolith](Mars_monolith "wikilink")
-   [Mineralogy of Mars](Mineralogy_of_Mars "wikilink")
-   [Outline of Mars](Outline_of_Mars "wikilink")
-   [List of gravitationally rounded objects of the Solar
    System](List_of_gravitationally_rounded_objects_of_the_Solar_System "wikilink")

Notes
-----

References
----------

External links
--------------

-   [Mars Trek -- An integrated map browser of maps and datasets for
    Mars](https://trek.nasa.gov/mars/)
-   [Google Mars](http://www.google.com/mars/) and [Google Mars
    3D](https://www.google.com/maps/space/mars/), interactive maps of
    the planet

[ ](Category:Mars "wikilink") [Category:Articles containing video
clips](Category:Articles_containing_video_clips "wikilink")
[Category:Astronomical objects known since
antiquity](Category:Astronomical_objects_known_since_antiquity "wikilink")
[Category:Planets of the Solar
System](Category:Planets_of_the_Solar_System "wikilink")
[Category:Terrestrial planets](Category:Terrestrial_planets "wikilink")

## Input Format:
No input

## Output Format:
Print a single line containing the required string (look at line 990 of the problem statement)

## Constraints:
No constraints

## Sample Input:
```
```

## Sample Output:
```
<figure it out>
```
